My findingsFIGURE 1-MY FINDINGSMy findingsIt is important to say that writing my thesis has been a therapeutic endeavour. As a result, I have grown and feel I have become more authentic in the way I relate to others and to myself. It is interesting to note that in order for me to inquire into the therapeutic benefits of drawing mandalas, I experienced the depths of what a therapeutic inquiry can bring. C. G. Jung, a Swiss psychiatrist and psychotherapist, used mandalas for his own personal development as well as with his clients. In his autobiography “Memories, Dreams, Reflections,” Jung wrote: “I sketched every morning in a notebook a small circular drawing…which seemed to correspond to my inner situation at the time…With the help of these drawings I could observe my psychic transformation from day to day…      Only gradually did I discover what the mandala really is…Formation, Transformations...      Mandalas were cryptograms concerning the state of the self which were presented to me anew everyday. In them I saw the self- that is my whole being-actively at work. To be sure, at first I could only dimly understand them, but they seemed to me highly significant, and I guarded them like precious pearls” (C.J. Jung, 1963, P. 187).In order to find out what I have come to know. I revisited my data. I selected keywords which stayed with me within my own creative process of drawing mandalas, in conjunction with the participant’s reflections as well. I clustered these phrases with the titles. I also drew a mandala for the 10 cluster titles. I feel that each mandala illustrates and speaks volumes in describing significant aspects of the therapeutic work. The following are the phrases and key words that were most resonant:1. Repetition* ‘Repetition is calming’2. Mindfulness* ‘Trying to keep a consistent pattern when drawing but letting go of the fact that each line will never be the same’* ‘Practice listening to our emotions, thoughts, feelings, as well as our bodies’* ‘Intuitive’3. Processing*  ‘Use no measurements, just my felt sense when I draw’* ‘Having a break helps to process and evaluate where my emotions and thoughts are’4. Hypnotic/ Focusing* Fixed on the process and not the end result- concentrating and focusing on each line’* ‘I became lost in the stillness at times’5. Emergence* ‘Symbology seems to emerge within the process without thought’6. Decelerate/ Calming* ‘Slowing down all my thoughts and feelings’7. Self expression* ‘Providing me with a dialogue to better understand my unconsciousness and connect me with my own visual language’8. Connections/Awareness* ‘Fascinated by what it might have to teach me’* ‘What the symbols represents as well as what resonates for me now. As well as becoming aware of our bodies, mind and thoughts’9. Self care* ‘Debriefing tool’* ‘Self care’* ‘Difference perspective’* ‘Connecting to our emotions’10. Relief* ‘A sense of relief from my emotional content’* ‘Self-reflective’*  ‘The process has a transformative quality- which I feel heals old patterns and emotional wounds’* ‘I felt held by remaining within the circles’After I drew the mandalas, I then saw significant overlap with the 10 therapeutic benefits, I clustered them into 5 groups which had the most relevance to one another. In the following chapter I addressed each in more depth. I have placed the mandalas at the beginning of each section which relates to that cluster.