Mandalas within a therapeutic contextFIGURE 1-TOGETHERSetting the sceneTitle: Self-ExpressionWhen I started this inquiry I was so captivated to address the therapeutic benefits, but instead I became lost in the therapeutical moments that I constantly had when I was engaging in my own process. Therefore, at the beginning of writing up my findings, I was still entrenched and had not resurfaced back into the chair of the researcher. As a result, initially, I seemed to bypassed how it actually applies within a therapeutic context. I took myself out of the equation and the relationship which surrounds the making of a mandala and its greater significance. It was as though I dissected the whole process to just the physical action of drawing a mandala. As I write this, my pattern of taking myself out of the equation has always been prominent in my personal and professional life. I immediately realise that I tend to place others on peddle stool and never confidently trust my own abilities and skills where I down play them, even though I may be highly competent and unique. I always thought that I was humble and I liked that, however this was very distorted thinking and in turn clouded my confidence and was an immense hindrance. I can now clearly see that being confident in my self worth as a person and a professional is much different to being arrogant. I feel I can remain humble whilst being confident.Before I address how I have used mandalas within the therapeutic relationship in the past. I firstly want to make it implicit that with any therapeutic alliance, I feel building rapport and trust with the other is essential. Hence, I would offer the mandala process to the other only after trust and rapport has been established. I also want to make it clear self-expression is fundamentally an expressive bio-product from any multi-modality and I hold all the arts at a high regard. However, we tend to resonate with certain modalities, the visual arts and the visual language entrance is where I feel most comfortable and connected. I find it easier to describe, rather than explain when I access my embodied feelings along with my imagery. Siegel (2009) states “When we describe rather than explain, we are bringing the experientially rich right side into collaboration with the word-smithing left hemisphere” (p. 114). Siegel (2009) also mentioned that “Tuning in to the body’s signals and to imagery that arose from them also helped… gain awareness of his feelings, because feelings themselves are the subjective sensation of what is going on inside the entire body- from our limbs and torso up to our brainstem, limbic areas and cortex” (p. 115).Through this inquiry I have come to know there are different ways of knowing, and interestingly most are not in our conscious framework, they are preverbal and pre-reflective knowings. Antonio Damasio (2005) states “the brain constantly needs up to date information on the body’s state to regulate all the processes that keep it alive” (para. 19).  When placing the mandala within the therapy session, I feel it to be imperative to state that it is not about the end result, but simply about the process. This is the same in any creative arts therapy activities. As Hass-Cohen et al. (2008) state “Expressing, experiencing and learning how to regulate affects can perhaps happen more easily through sensory integration activities and kinaesthetic movement associated with art therapy activities” (p. 35). Because I feel being mindful and centring is a significant component in creating a mandala, before beginning the session I like to do a very short breathing exercise for both of us to focus on our bodies and slow our breaths. “Controlled attention enables us to develop the self-regulation that allows new ways of responding to create new patterns of neural activity and contribute to neural plasticity” (Seigel, 2006. P.153).I have noticed that when we over think, I feel it is more the reason to place our reasoning and judgmental mind to the side and focus on the bodily sensations in that moment. The following quote by Rick Hanson explains our negative bias: The brain has specialized circuits that register negative experiences immediately in emotional memory. On the other hand, positive experiences – unless they are very novel or intense – have standard issue memory systems, and these require that something be held in awareness for many seconds in a row to transfer from short-term memory buffers to long-term storage. Since we rarely do this, most positive experiences flow through the brain like water through a sieve, while negative ones are caught every time. (Rick Hanson, 2016, para.2).Therefore, knowing that ours brains have a negative bias, I feel focusing on not having an agenda on what to draw will free this bias we all have, instead I like to focus on the pure lines, shapes and colours and not specific objects when I draw and as Tufnell et al. (2004) state “forming or creating things that move us changes and expands our perception. What we create is always in some way speaking into being a part of ourselves which is yet hidden and unspoken, unexpressed even to ourselves” (p.41). I am more concerned with meaning making and what that feels like in the present moment. I feel that there is no wrong way in creating a mandala and there are no prescribed techniques that need to be followed, However, I feel drawing a comfortable size circle to create a mandala in is worth mentioning, as well as working from inside out works well, as it reduces the smudging and visually it is nice to see how the mandala builds and expands.When I companion I firstly stay present with the other, I foster interpersonal attunement and find resonance, which builds trust. I like to create a mandala along side the other which also provide the space and support, but once the other has finished I like to place my own mandala to the side and reflect on my own after the session. Through the creative phase of drawing a mandala with the other, I like to keep conversation to only when they request the discussion. I feel the process of conversations within mandalas can support with our emotional regulation and self soothing and which is an accessible mindful therapeutic tool and thus, if the other has resonated with this process I offer them to continue conversations within mandalas in their own time. 