The making of an Embodied mandalaRepetition- Title: I understand it all betterMindfulness- Titled: Going within, but allowing it back outProcessing- Titled: Unlocking the vaultHypnotic focusing- Titled: Be ok in itDecelerate/calming- Title: No wordsConnection/awareness- Titled: Grounding connections It is important to state that the mandala process I work from is that of my own. And before I move into my process I want to address the phenomena of mandala colouring books as I find this phenomena disconcerting. Nonetheless, I can not fault the phenomena of colouring in has highlighted the benefits of taking the time to relax and it is a great form of stress relief. However, as Siegel states “mindfulness training is not the same as relaxation training. You may feel calm or you may not feel calm, but it’s a form of mindful awareness which is very different from just relaxing” (Dan Siegel, 2009, retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gr4Od7kqDT8)This is the distinction that I would like to make between colouring in and creating one’s own mandala. Colouring in comes from more a relaxation training and creating ones own is a mindful training. I feel producing a mandala allows higher chances of integration of both sides of the brain which brings about well being and harmony within. I feel when I use my right side of my brain where I use a descriptive attitude and my imagery, in conjunction with my left side of the brain where I use my vocabulary and explanations, I bring together both sides of my brain in the quieting process of the conversation within a mandala. As Siegel states the bulk of scientific research has been on mindfulness mediation, but there are many ways to practice mindfulness. I fell sad that we have moved away from what Damasio (2010) states that art has become “… a privileged means to transact factual and emotional information deemed to be important for individuals and society... (p.296) and as Dr. Siegel (2009) states “the key is to link left and right, not replace one imbalance with another” (p.116). I do value the Buddhist, Native American Indian and Carl Jung viewpoints in relation to creating mandalas. However, in our western culture mandalas have never been a teaching tool or fostered cultural identity through the creative process. Instead it has become a diagnostic tool through the ‘mandala assessment research instrument’ (MARIA)and as a result, the primal process of creating a mandala has lost the quality to teach ourselves about ourselves as well as heal and restore aspects of ourselves. Reflecting on my own relationship to the process of creating a mandala I feel as though it is an embodied centring process. I agree with Buchalter (2013) statement “The mandala serves as a tangible object in which to focus one’s inner thoughts, assisting in the difficulty of quieting one’s mind during the practice of meditation” (as cited in Paige. M. Beckwith, para 11). I intentionally focus on the present moment and attune myself to my embodied felt sensing. Emotions become more evident when I sit within my embodied self and when I quieten my reasoning judgmental mind. This is in contrast “to striving to achieve an outcome, intentions are more about directing consciousness towards the desired change. They come from a deeper place” (B. J. Davis, 2015, p. 44). The mandala process is not about problem solving, its about connecting, reflecting and making meaning. The mandala process is a mindful process, but also a reflective one. Cohen and Finlay state that “long term mindfulness practices appear to structurally change the brain and promote psychological self regulation and well-being.” ?????????Where did I get this?Our society does not place a lot of value on our emotional health, so hearing “there is evidence that mindfulness helps develop effective emotion regulation in the brain” (Corcoran, Farb, Anderson, & Segal, 2010; Farb et al., 2010; Siegel, 2007b) makes me value such mindful activities. Hence I feel mindful mandalas are extremely important to perform. As Carl Jung (1968) states “real liberation comes not from glossing over or repressing painful states of feeling, but only from experiencing them to the full” (p.335). The creation of mandalas places me into a calm and tranquil state of mind, initially words are not essential, but images are. Drawing the same line over and over becomes hypnotic and helps me focus on the present moment and not get caught in the explosion of my cognition. In a single day we seem to have a thousand and one distractions making it hard to be still. But when I am free to focus deep within, having a conversation within a mandala, I hypnotically focus on my own experiences on a deeper level. As Lowith (1978) states “As opposed to forgetting, repetition serves recollection of the meaning of existence, in order to opt into existence” (p. 170). Hass-Cohen and Findlay mentioned: “the round shape pulls the clients art making into the centre, promoting a sense of control and concentration.” (check page, Noah Hass-Cohen, Joanna C Findlay, art therapy and the neuroscience of relationship, creativity and resiliency) cant find page numberI feel reflecting is much of the process, then generating it and as Dr Siegel (2012)states: “the notion of reflection is the awareness which brings the mind to a place, that goes beneath automatic pilot and which allows new combinations to be created, so that behaviours differ” (Seigel, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVYd1W4iAm0My reflection process within the mandalas I create, allows me to see the surprising elements that come to the surface and which serve as an access point for me. I am able to make sense of my embodied feelings and where I sit in that moment. I feel keeping within a descriptive and imaginative manner is useful. Thus, I feel that “art wakes us up from amoral sleep by helping us to feel more, see more, imagine more, contemplate more and know more” (M. A. Franklin, 2012, p. 89). I feel writing down particular key words which come to mind from the mandala is also important. As Siegel (2009) states “using words to describe and label this internal world can actually be useful not just for…” people who have “trouble accessing their emotions, but for those who need to find a way to bring balance to overactive feelings” (p. 116). Hence titling and describing what I see, think and feel, and or dialoguing with the image, helps me to integrate and attune into my inner world which promotes my resilience. As Cohen et al. (2008) state “making meaning from emotional experiences is the essence of emotional awareness” (p. 298). Shifting my own perspectives by turning the mandala and viewing it from different angle and distances also helps to amplify what lays within the image. Consequence, I feel that “emotional processing involves arousal, regulation, transformation, awareness and meaning making” (Greeenberg et al. 2006, p293) And this mandala process allows us to process our day, our thoughts and emotions. Drawing a mandala is a creative way to process and unlock our vault of our emotions which we may be locked away, along with other information which may be out of our consciousness. Warren. R. Lett (1992) states “using the arts in therapy helps us to uncover an unimagined storehouse of inner richness- packages from life put away into the spare room of disconnectedness, until an experiential imperative arises that drives us into our neglected selves.” (how the arts make a different in therapy article)no page number para. 37). and also from an interpersonal Nero-Biological stance of awareness Dr Siegel (2012) said “when we use awareness to intentionally focus attention in a certain way, you change not just the function of the brain, but also you change its structure” (Siegel, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVYd1W4iAm0)