ValuesFIGURE 1-MY VALUES “Who looks outside, dreams; who looks inside awakens” (Carl Jung –date get origin)ValuesI have come to a better understanding of my values and needs and have become wiser for it, through creating my conversations within the mandalas. It has been great to be able to witness my own emotional evolution. I feel that I have healed parts of myself that needed attention. I feel I have immersed myself within the mandalas in combination with other processes. My values and needs were submerged before starting my inquiry. FIGURE 2- DOUBLE EXPOSURE OF MY VALUESMy titles are formed when I look at the mandala and rely on my felt sense, as well as any imaginative visualizations that might spring to mind. It is very much a free writing exercise with my visual imagery which comes to the fore.ConnectionTitle: Overlap, touch and sway in the windFIGURE 3-CONNECTIONThe first value I have in my work and life is connection. It is nice to be awakened and realise that we live in a world where we are relational beings and connecting is an innate trait. As Buddha states “All things appear and disappear because of the concurrence of causes and conditions. Nothing ever exists entirely alone; everything is in relation to everything else.” ReferenceClarityTitle: Being able to understand peacefullyFIGURE 4-CLARITY“If you want to understand the jungle, you can’t be content just to sail back and forth near the shore. You’ve got to get into it, no matter how strange or frightening it may seem.”) Jung Find original. I value clarity, which is the quality of being able to easily see, hear and understand and to be able to understand not only the meaning within my experiences but the journey I took to arrive at these meanings. My thesis takes you through my process of finding clarity for myself and also describes why I value drawing mandalas from a therapeutic point of view. Imaginative visualizationsTitle: So much to learn, open and seeFIGURE 5-IMAGANATIVE VISUALIZATIONSMy third value is about the power of imaginative visualizations. Elkins states that “The conscious mind engages in a more logical thought and rational thinking. The unconscious mind processes information in a more experiential manner and responds to feelings, images and suggestions more automatically” (pp59 Gary Elkins, )date….)Hypnotic relations therapy principles and applications) Hence, if we are aware that there is so much beneath the surface which is not conscious, and allow ourselves to be open to our imaginations, we may bring into awareness the little gems that have been outside our consciousness through this experiential explorations. Thus, I agree with McNiff’s comment when he states: “I prefer a more imaginative attitude that views the image as a step a head of the reflecting mind, as a guide who shows me where I can go and what I can be.” (McNiff, p 67,2004)(Art Heals) EmergenceTitle: Openness to let things naturally formFIGURE 6-EMERGENCEMy fourth value is emergence. To be able to let go and trust the process of emergence which in short is “an intuitive improvisational quality and seems to derived from a felt resonance to the current moment.” (Lett,p, 11, 2011)(making sense of our lives) As Merleau-Ponty states: “Thinking a movement is destroying the movement.” (Merleau-Ponty 1962) and so when we let our reflexive-reflective interactions flow into awareness we reap the benefits.