My findingsIt is important to say that writing my thesis has been a therapeutic endeavour. As a result, I have grown and feel I have become more authentic in the way I relate to others and to myself. Importantly, as I inquired into the experiences of drawing mandalas, I actually experienced significant benefits. Like Jung, I too experienced a transformation of sorts through this process. Jung also used mandala drawing as a way of making sense of his experience. He wrote: “I sketched every morning in a notebook a small circular drawing…which seemed to correspond to my inner situation at the time…With the help of these drawings I could observe my psychic transformation from day to day…      Only gradually did I discover what the mandala really is…Formation, Transformations...      Mandalas were cryptograms concerning the state of the self which were presented to me anew everyday. In them I saw the self- that is my whole being-actively at work. To be sure, at first I could only dimly understand them, but they seemed to me highly significant, and I guarded them like precious pearls” (Jung, 1963, P. 187).In order to form my findings in a coherent manner, I returned to the inquiry process define my emerging understanding of the power of mandala drawing in therapeutic endeavours. To this end I selected keywords that most strongly resonated with me in my own creative process of drawing mandalas that I have previously documented, as well as the resonant key phrases from the participants’ reflections. I clustered these phrases and created titles for each cluster. I also drew a mandala for the 10 clusters titles. I became aware that each mandala is illustrative of the therapeutic work I do. The following are the phrases and key words that were most resonant:(The different fonts delineate my reflections in …. and the participants’ reflections shown in … font.)1. Repetition* ‘Repetition is calming’2. Mindfulness* ‘Trying to keep a consistent pattern when drawing but letting go of the fact that each line will never be the same’* ‘Practice listening to our emotions, thoughts, feelings, as well as our bodies’* ‘Intuitive’3. Processing*  ‘Use no measurements, just my felt sense when I draw’* ‘Having a break helps to process and evaluate where my emotions and thoughts are’4. Hypnotic/ Focusing* Fixed on the process and not the end result- concentrating and focusing on each line’* ‘I became lost in the stillness at times’5. Emergence* ‘Symbology seems to emerge within the process without thought’6. Decelerate/ Calming* ‘Slowing down all my thoughts and feelings’7. Self expression* ‘Providing me with a dialogue to better understand my unconsciousness and connect me with my own visual language’8. Connections/Awareness* ‘Fascinated by what it might have to teach me’* ‘What the symbols represents as well as what resonates for me now. As well as becoming aware of our bodies, mind and thoughts’9. Self care* ‘Debriefing tool’* ‘Self care’* ‘Difference perspective’* ‘Connecting to our emotions’10. Relief* ‘A sense of relief from my emotional content’* ‘Self-reflective’*  ‘The process has a transformative quality- which I feel heals old patterns and emotional wounds’* ‘I felt held by remaining within the circles’To create a more focused findings sections of this thesis, I decided to combine some clusters, thereby reducing the number of clusters from 10 to 5. Each of the 5 sections that follow include the cluster titles, the mandalas and references to the relevant literature.  Section 1 Mandala: * Self expression (bold) Section 1 sets the scene for how a mandala can be introduced within the therapeutic setting. I feel self expression is integral to arts therapy practice, but also to each of us, whether this expression occurs visually or in other modalities. I did not want to cluster this mandala with any other. Section 2Mandala:* Repetition* Mindfulness* Processing * Hypnotic/ focusing * Decelerate/calming* Connection/awareness Section 2 speaks about how the making of a mandala is an embodied action. I clustered the 6 mandalas above as there is a similarity in the way each speak of embodied action with the mandala.Section 3Mandala:* EmergenceIn section 3 I address the emergence and importance of re looking within the process of working with mandalas in a therapeutic context.Section 4Mandala:* Self care In section 4 I describe the broader application of self care and the value for the therapist in practicing ways of regulating their own emotional experience. As therapists, we encounter exceedingly energetic emotions in arts therapy sessions, we need to take care of ourselves, so we can better serve the other.Section 5Mandala:* ReliefIn section 5, I conclude my thesis by coming back to my experience of my embodied and mindful conversations within mandalas. I give a practical example of my journey of experiencing a relief from distress and un ease. I also describe my process of getting a tattoo. I feel this process was a creative synthesis; an expression of my embodied knowing. Section 1 Setting the sceneTitle: Self-ExpressionWhen I started this inquiry I was so intent on addressing the therapeutic benefits of working with mandalas. I became lost in the “therapeutic” or deeply insightful moments that I constantly had when I was engaging in my own process. As I commenced writing these findings, I realized I had forgotten that I had taken myself as a therapist out of the picture as well as the relationship between client and therapist that proceeds the making of a mandala. It was as though I reduced the whole process to just the physical action of drawing a mandala. As I write this, my pattern of taking myself out of the equation has always been prominent in my personal and professional life. I realise that I tend to place others on a pedestal and never confidently trust my own abilities and skills. I down play my capacity, even though I am a very competent therapist and uniquely creative human being. I always thought that I was humble and I liked that, however I have come to believe this is a rather distorted way of thinking and it has clouded my confidence. I can now clearly see that being confident as a person and a professional is quite different to being arrogant. I feel now I can remain humble whilst being confident.Before I address how I have used mandalas in the work I have done as a therapist, I firstly want to highlight that, with any therapeutic endeavour, building rapport and trust with the other is essential. I would offer the mandala process to the other only after this trust and rapport has been established. In my work I value multi- modal self-expression. The visual arts are where I feel most comfortable and connected. I find it easier to describe what I see, rather than explain what I think, and only then I can access my embodied feelings. Siegel (2009) states “When we describe rather than explain, we are bringing the experientially rich right side into collaboration with the word-smithing left hemisphere” (p. 114). Siegel also says that “Tuning in to the body’s signals and to imagery that arose from them also helped… [his client]gain awareness of his feelings, because feelings themselves are the subjective sensation of what is going on inside the entire body- from our limbs and torso up to our brainstem, limbic areas and cortex” (p. 115).Through this inquiry I have come to know there are different ways of knowing, some of which are preverbal and pre-reflective. When introducing the idea of the mandala within the therapy session, I feel it is important to state that process of making the image is really important. This is, I believe, true for any creative arts therapy processes. A process of making a mandala is kinaesthetic and with a given focus on attending to the process, this allows the art maker to incorporate their embodied sensations and the mandala details as it takes form. As Hass-Cohen et al. (2008) state “Expressing, experiencing and learning how to regulate affects can perhaps happen more easily through sensory integration activities and kinaesthetic movement associated with art therapy activities” (p. 35).I believe it is important to be focused before attempting to work with a mandala. The focusing facilitates self expression and so I begin with an invitation to participate in a short breathing exercise for both of us to quiet our minds, bodies and slow our breaths. Again as Seigel says: “Controlled attention enables us to develop the self-regulation that allows new ways of responding to create new patterns of neural activity and contribute to neural plasticity” (2006. P.153).I have noticed that we tend to over think, and so I feel there is even more reason to place our reasoning and judgmental mind to the side and focus on the bodily sensations in the moment. As Hanson explains:The brain has specialized circuits that register negative experiences immediately in emotional memory. On the other hand, positive experiences – unless they are very novel or intense – have standard issue memory systems, and these require that something be held in awareness for many seconds in a row to transfer from short-term memory buffers to long-term storage. Since we rarely do this, most positive experiences flow through the brain like water through a sieve, while negative ones are caught every time. (Rick Hanson, 2016, para.2).If indeed our brains have a negative bias, I feel focusing on not having an agenda on what to draw may help free this bias we all have. When I draw I feel as if I am “forming or creating things that move us changes and expands our perception.” (Tufnell et al. p, 41,2004). Hence, focusing on the lines, shapes and colours allows this movement away from the clouded thinking we may have when we are stuck in a negative frame of mind. In my art and my therapeutic work, I am concerned with meaning making and now that feels in the present moment. I believe that there is “no wrong” way to create a mandala and there are no prescribed techniques that need to be followed, However, I feel drawing a comfortable size circle to begin to create a mandala is a good beginning. Working from inside out reduces the smudging and visually it is, I believe, satisfying to see how the mandala builds and expands.When I companion another, I try to stay present and foster interpersonal attunement and endeavour to show my resonances all of which builds trust. I like to create a mandala alongside the other which also seems to foster a safe creative space and support. Once the other person has finished I generally place my mandala to the side and reflect on this on my own after the session. During the drawing phrase of a mandala with the other, I generally don’t initiate a conversation unless the other person asks for support or makes comments that I feel require a response from me. Section 2The making of an Embodied mandalaRepetition- Title: I understand it all betterMindfulness- Titled: Going within, but allowing it back outProcessing- Titled: Unlocking the vaultHypnotic focusing- Titled: Be ok in itDecelerate/calming- Title: No wordsConnection/awareness- Titled: Grounding connections The mandala process I work from is my own, and before I move into my process I want to make comment on the phenomena of mandala colouring books. I find this somewhat disconcerting, although I concede that colouring in may support relaxation and from many accounts form of stress relief. However, as Siegel states “mindfulness training is not the same as relaxation training. You may feel calm or you may not feel calm, but it’s a form of mindful awareness which is very different from just relaxing” (Dan Siegel, 2009, retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gr4Od7kqDT8)The distinction I would like to make between colouring in and creating one’s own mandala, is that colouring in may well be a form of relaxation but creating one’s own work can be a mindful, expressive, unique expansion of oneself. I feel producing an original mandala is more complex and integrates both sides of the brain which can bring about well being and harmony within. I feel when I use predominately the right side of my brain utilizing descriptive attitude and my imagery, in conjunction with the left side of the brain where I use my verbalizing and logical thought process vocabulary. I bring together both sides of my brain in the quieting process of the conversation within a mandala. As Siegel (2009) states “the key is to link left and right, not replace one imbalance with another” (p.116). I do value the Buddhist, Native American Indian and Jungian viewpoints in relation to creating mandalas. However, in our western culture mandalas are not a formal teaching tool or used to foster cultural identity through the creative process. Sadly, mandalas have become a diagnostic tool as evidenced by the ‘mandala assessment research instrument’ (MARIA). The process of creating a mandala has lost the quality to teach ourselves about ourselves as well as heal and restore aspects of ourselves. Reflecting on my own relationship to the process of creating a mandala I feel as though it is an embodied centering process. I agree with the Buchalter (2013) statement “The mandala serves as a tangible object in which to focus one’s inner thoughts, assisting in the difficulty of quieting one’s mind during the practice of meditation” (as cited in Paige. M. Beckwith, para 11). I intentionally focus on the present moment and attune myself to my embodied felt sensing. Emotions become more evident when I sit within my embodied self and when I quieten my reasoning judgmental mind. This is in contrast “to striving to achieve an outcome, intentions are more about directing consciousness towards the desired change. They come from a deeper place” (B. J. Davis, 2015, p. 44). The mandala process is not about problem solving, its about connecting, reflecting and making meaning. The mandala process is a mindful process, but also a reflective one. I believe our society does not place significant value on our emotional health, so hearing “there is evidence that mindfulness helps develop effective emotion regulation in the brain” (Corcoran, Farb, Anderson, & Segal, 2010; Farb et al., 2010; Siegel, 2007) makes me value such mindful activities. Hence I feel treating mandalas mindfully is extremely important. As Jung (1968) states “real liberation comes not from glossing over or repressing painful states of feeling, but only from experiencing them to the full” (p.335). The creation of mandalas enables me to become calm and tranquil. Drawing the same line over and over becomes hypnotic and helps me focus on the present moment and not get caught in the explosion of my thoughts. In a single day we seem to have a thousand and one distractions making it hard to be still. But when I am free to focus within, and have a conversation with a mandala, I focus on my own experiences at a deeper level. As Lowith (1978) states “As opposed to forgetting, repetition serves recollection of the meaning of existence, in order to opt into existence” (p. 170). Hass-Cohen and Findlay mentioned: “the round shape pulls the clients art making into the centre, promoting a sense of control and concentration.” (check page, Noah Hass-Cohen, Joanna C Findlay, art therapy and the neuroscience of relationship, creativity and resiliency) cant find page numberI feel reflecting on the process is as much a part of the work with a client as generating the mandala. Siegel (2012)states: “the notion of reflection is the awareness which brings the mind to a place, that goes beneath automatic pilot and which allows new combinations to be created, so that behaviours differ” (Seigel, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVYd1W4iAm0My own reflective process allows me to see the surprising elements that come to the surface and serve as an access point for me to explore further. I am able to make sense of my embodied feelings and how I feel in that moment. I believe that “art wakes us up from amoral sleep by helping us to feel more, see more, imagine more, contemplate more and know more” (M. A. Franklin, 2012, p. 89). Writing down particular key words which come to mind from the mandala is also important. As Siegel (2009) states “using words to describe and label this internal world can actually be useful .” This is not only for people who have “trouble accessing their emotions, but for those who need to find a way to bring balance to overactive feelings” (p. 116). Hence titling and describing what I see, think and feel, and dialoguing with the image, helps me to integrate and attune into my inner world which promotes my resilience. Shifting my own perspectives by turning the mandala and viewing it from different angle and distances also helps to amplify what lays within the image. Consequently, I feel that “emotional processing involves arousal, regulation, transformation, awareness and meaning making” (Greeenberg et al. 2006, p293) And this mandala process allows us to make sense of our day, our thoughts and emotions. Drawing a mandala is a creative way to explore our emotions which may have been out of our awareness along with other pre reflective experiencing. Lett (1992) states “using the arts in therapy helps us to uncover an unimagined storehouse of inner richness- packages from life put away into the spare room of disconnectedness, until an experiential imperative arises that drives us into our neglected selves.” (how the arts make a different in therapy article)no page number para. 37). Taking an interpersonal Nero-Biological stance of awareness Siegel (2012) said “when we use awareness to intentionally focus attention in a certain way, you change not just the function of the brain, but also you change its structure” (Siegel, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVYd1W4iAm0)Section 3 The Emergence and re-looking process of a mandalaEmergence- Titled: Feeling within the wobblesThe mandala process is an emergent process. I feel OK with the doubts and wobbles and trust that the journey of co-creation within mandalas, assists us to experience all of our experiencing in a more fulfilled and meaningful way. This approach is similar to that described by McNiff when (1998) he states “trusting the process is based on a belief that something valuable will emerge when we step into the unknown” (p. 27) I really feel as though I trusted my process of stepping into the conversations within mandalas, knowing that something important come to light from my experience. As McNiff (1998) says “withhold your desire for outcomes. You don’t want to be at ‘the end’ of the process when you are just beginning or in the thick of it” (p 116). Of course there was a part of me that just wanted to skip to the end where I understood everything and felt good again. But “rather than blunting the awareness of my conflicts through avoidance, I try to stay close to them, to directly engage their power to transform.” (McNiff, 2004, p. 54). To reiterate, this mandala process is not a problem solving activity. Even though, in the end it may have this quality, it is rather a process that allows “the mind [to be]is a self organizing emergent process, that is both embodied and relational, which regulates the flow of energy and information” (Dr Dan, 2012, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVYd1W4iAm0 Section 4Broader applicationWhat is good for clients, is good enough for therapistsFIGURE 1-SELF-CARE- TITLED: STOP, LOOK WITHIN, STRETCH IN THE POSSIBILITIESHuang-po, ninth-centery Chinese Zen master said “Chase it and it always eludes you; run from it and it is always there” (McNiff, 2004, p. 121). Siegel states that reflections and being aware of our intersubjective lives is essential for our well being. He calls this “time in” where we refer inward to our inner worlds and sift through our sensations, imagery, feelings and thoughts. Through this thesis inquiry I reflected and remain curious on the questions of what are emotions and how are they formed. Siegel (2011) said “the take home message are emotions arise from the body, they interact in the lower part of our brain and it’s this higher part, behind your forehead, that coordinates and balances the whole thing” (Dan Siegel, Retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-BJpvdBBp4)Siegel (2012) also states when we create integration in our lives through using mindfulness and creative activities we can better “reflect and have relationships which connect and are caring…this stimulates the growth of the integrative fibres of the brain, and these fibres allow you to have resilience.” (Siegel, retrieved: youtube.com/watch?v=LiyaSr5aeho)and the “internal education where you are getting this self connection directly helps your connection with others” (Siegel, 2009, retrieved: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gr4Od7kqDT8) As a therapist it is fundamental to our clients and our own well being that we connect, reflect and take care of ourselves. Section 5Practical Example of self careRelief- Titled: Letting it goI almost always feel physical and emotional relief drawing a mandala. It is astounding how much I feel I have healed with each line of the image and as well as with the completion of each mandala. As I have mentioned previously, I have kept a mandala diary over the last 2 years and this is a small example of the self care I have undertaken. The next four mandalas depict the exploration of betrayal and dishonesty. As a result, I was able to let go of the emotional wounds I had been suffering. I feel that this process has liberated me from the destruction that I once felt in relationship to my former partner. FIGURE 2-KEPT IN THE DARKI drew this mandala when I found out from a friend that my former partner married one of our Khmer friends who was his assistant at work. It was 1 year and 7 months after our relationship ended. FIGURE 3-PISSED OFFInitially, I was very angry with the deceit and lies of my former partner. FIGURE 4-HURT OTHERS COULD NOT BE HONESTI felt hurt that there where people around me who knew the situation but said nothing. FIGURE 5- LETTING GO OF THE BULLSHIT AND REALIZING THERE IS SO MUCH MORE OUT THEREBy the 4th mandala, I felt a huge relief which was a transition from being so angry at the beginning of drawing these 4 mandalas to letting go and moving on. The symbolic nature of this 4th mandala prompted me to think of the universe and appreciate the wider view of my circumstances. It is fascinating to note that I was not affected by my former partner marriage, but only dismayed about the lies and disrespect he showed towards me. At the beginning of my thesis all I wanted was clarity and to understand why he chose to leave, but amazingly through this inquiry I was able to create my own clarity in terms of my life without him, which feels much more powerful and empowering than I could have ever hoped for. My tattoo synthesis FIGURE 6-ALL MY TATTOO DESIGNS LAYOUTMy tattoo synthesisMy tattoo as a creative synthesis is a practical example of the power of the mandala process. As I reflected on my data, I became intent on designing a tattoo for myself. This fixation was driven by my exploration of the themes which came to light through my mandalas 1-6. A deep reflection on my process was what I needed to make sense of my new ‘knowings’. Being present and grounded within myself has always been a strong value of mine and in 1996 I tattooed myself with a sewing needle and Indian ink (I simply pricked myself with some Indian ink on a needle.) The circle shape took me 1 hour to do. My design was supposed to reflect a circle which wrapped into itself on the top, representing balance within myself and the outer edge of the letter ‘R’ for Rachel directly underneath. FIGURE 7-MY SELF INFLICTED TATTOOIt was six years later that I saw this tattoo in a new light, when my former partner and I started our relationship. We were both rather dumbfounded to “see” his name in my design when it was viewed from another angle. For many years I considered having a professional tattoo of his name as we saw it on my leg. It is only now that I have become utterly convinced that I should get another tattoo over this original one. I feel tattooing over the shape I created which reminds me of his name is symbolic of letting go and moving forward. Yes, a mandala tattoo! How fitting you might say. I am going to remain true to my original tattoo which was about ‘balance’, but will take this new design further to embody my ‘knowings’ about my needs and values. This mandala includes balance but also the value of ‘reciprocity’ which is so important to me at this point in my life. I love that through this process of quietening conversation with mandalas’, I permanently engraved my skin with a mandala, which I feel indicates how much I respect the process. Having a mandala tattoo feels completely right and authentic.On the 24th of September 2015 ‘Kane Melbourne’ tattooed the mandala design on my ankle. I was excited and scared at the same time. It took around 45 minutes to complete. I was expecting it to be excruciatingly painful but I was pleasantly surprised. It did not hurt a great deal and the moments of pain I could easily withstand. The sound of the tattoo machine was not as loud and distracting as I thought and having background music helped to focus my mind away from those moments of pain. I was wanting to watch the process, but I was lying in an awkward position and so could not see. I did occasionally look to see ‘Kane Melbourne’ chewing his gum in a rhythmic motion or singing along to the songs while he focused on his work. After payment, ‘Kane Melbourne’ told me he really enjoyed tattooing mandalas and suggested to come back if I wanted another. After a few days I emailed ‘Kane Melbourne’ as I was curious to know his experience of tattooing the mandala design on my leg. He responded quickly to say:  “As with most tattoos, especially for new clientele the process always begins with mild stress and anxiety. But once the stencil is where it needs to be and work gets underway the whole process becomes a bit Zen to be honest. You kind of get in the zone and everything else loses importance. Stippling ‘dot work’ specifically is particularly calming.”“I definitely found during the process that I was calmer. Between the process and the conversation, it was very chilled. From your arrival until about five minutes into the actual tattooing there is underlying situational analysing. Making sure you were comfortable and relaxed is secondary only to my state (since I'm the one who has to perform).”“After the tattoo was finished I felt a sense of accomplishment I guess. You know, regardless of the design they're all your little babies. It's just that some of the designs speak more to me than others.”“I do enjoy drawing and tattooing mandalas. Where other art can be constantly exerting creative pressure on you, once the design is laid out as a mandala there's a certain "happiness in slavery". You follow the lines, and then fill each section the same way. The repetition is calming. Depending on the design you may end up outlining and filling precisely the same shape fifty times. I also love that perfect symmetry that when you study it further it is made up of little pockets of chaotic dot work.”“Answering all those questions definitely made me think about my process. It was an enlightening process.”I feel like this tattoo should have always been there. It does not feel alien having this new ink on my skin. A couple of days after my tattoo, my foot was achy, but the actually tattoo feels right at home. I am proud of my design; the meaning and the story behind it. I have noticed that so far I have kept the meaning to myself and I feel content with not sharing the significance with too many people. Actually I feel protective of it and I am really happy for other people just to observe its beauty and not know the long journey from the first tattoo through the inquiry process, to this lovely mandala.  I designed the outer designs of the tattoo to be different and I specifically wanted them to reflect the diverse moments in life as we all change. I purposely made no connection to the meaning of these symbols, but I feel having ‘Kane Melbourne’ reduce these symbols also supports the idea of needing a fixed understanding. I love that I left some ‘unknowns’ in my mandala because like life there are so many unknowns. FIGURE 8-BEFOREFIGURE 9-AFTER GETTING THE NEW TATTOO ON TOP OF THE OLD